Data and Code to reproduce Chapter 7 of the PhD Thesis "Emergent Complex Socio-economic Phenomena in Urban Environments: Hierarchies, Segregation and Cooperation"

# Data-driven modelling of cooperative decision-making under resource inequality in an urban collective-risk dilemma

The thesis is available at: https://hdl.handle.net/10803/697571

## Abstract

This work investigates how resource inequality shapes cooperative decision-making in a
collective-risk dilemma framed around urban air pollution mitigation action. Using data from
a large-scale citizen science experiment conducted in Barcelona, we analyse the behaviour of
decisions made by participants playing games under equal and unequal endowment conditions.
Experimental results show that those with fewer resources systematically contribute more
relative to their wealth, leading to increased inequality at the end of the game, as was also found
in previous references. Inspired by the experimental data, we propose four different probabilistic
decision-making strategies and simulate them to evaluate their ability to reproduce empirical
results. Comparing synthetic and real data, one of these strategies, where players respond to the
common fund’s evolution, most closely reproduces empirical cooperation patterns, indicating
that players strongly respond to the progression of the common fund. However, this strategy
alone does not capture all the observed variability, while the remaining proposals add valuable
insights to the question. As a consequence, we decide to develop a non-parametric hybrid
agent-based model in which agents integrate simultaneously all behavioural drivers. This hybrid
framework robustly reproduces cooperation dynamics and reveals how strategic preferences shift
by social and environmental conditions, offering a more realistic, data-driven understanding
of cooperation under inequality. Results show that the composition of resource inequality
significantly shapes cooperative trajectories. Overall, this work provides a flexible data-driven
framework for modelling and understanding human cooperation under unequal conditions in
collective-risk social dilemmas.

### Folders and files

- `Datasets/` Includes the datasets utilised to generate the Main and Supplementary figures.
- `Figures/` Includes all the Main and Supplementary figures generated by Python scripts.
- `1. Data preprocessing & Experimental analysis.ipynb` Code for experimental analysis.
- `2. Socio-demographics & Beliefs.ipynb` Code for extra analysis of the participants.
- `3. Conditional probabilities.ipynb` Code for conditional contribution probability hypotheses.
- `4. Data-driven simulations by hypothesis.ipynb` Code for stochastic simulations by each hypothesis.
- `5. Data-driven simulations for hybridisation.ipynb` Code for stochastic simulations by hybrid model.
- `6. Similarity metrics.ipynb` Code for similarity metrics computation.
- `functions.py` Code containing many functions used across all Python notebooks.

### Prerequisites

The code is in Python. To run all the code and scripts for this paper, you will need to install all packages in the requirements file.
Install the necessary Python packages by running:
```sh
 pip install -r requirements.txt
 ```
 (Ensure that you have a `requirements.txt` file listing all the necessary packages, or manually install the required packages as needed.)